Burroughs Mountain
moderate to hard (depending on route)
9.2 2840 7800
older

[MorningLight.jpg] Otherworldly mountain in the early morning light
[Burroughs.jpg] Burroughs Mountain
[AncientLava.jpg] Old lava flows created dramatic rock formations
[Summit.jpg] The summit felt so close you could almost reach out and touch it
[Meadows.jpg] Meadows along the southerly route option

I have yet to hike on the Moon, but the otherworldly top of Burroughs Mountain 
is close to how I imagine that might feel. It's a giant ridge formed by an 
ancient lava flow, high on the northeast flank of Rainier. The combination of 
altitude and rain shadow dryness creates a fragile alpine tundra (it's extra 
important to stay on the trail here, to avoid damaging plants that grow very 
slowly in this harsh environment!) with barren areas of dusty volcanic rock and 
pumice.

There are three distinct summits along the ridge. The figures shown above 
are for Third Burroughs, but many people turn around at Second Burroughs 
instead, cutting 3.2 miles and 1300' of climbing.

From the trailhead at Sunrise you have multiple route options. Take the high 
road, or the low road, or go one way and come back the other to make a partial 
loop.

For the (northerly) high road, take your choice of several trails to the five 
way junction by Frozen Lake, then follow the one signposted Burroughs Mountain. 
This is a steep and potentially dangerous traverse across the north side of 
First Burroughs, often snow covered until late in the summer. Watch your 
footing and turn back if it's icy. The green of Berkeley Park, below you to the 
north, makes a sharp contrast with the volcanic rock formations you are hiking 
over.

For the (southerly) low road, head west from Sunrise, then turn south onto a 
short section of the Wonderland, then west again near Shadow Lake. This route 
is slightly longer, trading the dramatic rocks of the northerly option for lush 
meadows.

These two routes meet up shortly past First Burroughs, after which the combined 
trail heads up the ridge to Second Burroughs. This is a wide plateau surrounded 
by a circle of rocks, with a superb view of Rainier's summit.

If your legs and lungs have enough juice left, the trail continues downhill and 
then back up again (plus some) to Third Burroughs. At this point the summit 
views get truly silly, and you'll start thinking the top of Rainier seems so 
close, surely another half hour and you could just nip on up there? Then you'll 
get distracted gazing down onto the Winthrop Glacier, 2000 vertical feet below 
you.

This trail also forms part of the [GlacierBasinLoop].
