Chenuis Falls Trail
moderate but unmaintained and an obstacle course in places
10 1270 2960
Carbon River
none
2022

[ChenuisFalls.jpg] Chenuis Falls
[Blowdown.jpg] A pile of blowdowns where the trail ought to be
[PrettyBlowdown.jpg] An unusually pretty blowdown
[BigBlowdown.jpg] A really big blowdown
[Boundary.jpg] The National Park boundary
[MossyTrees.jpg] Mossy trees must have been taking fashion tips from Dr. Seuss

First a clarification: Chenuis Falls itself is a family-friendly side trip along the 
[CarbonRiver] hike. This entry refers to an abandoned trail that heads north from the 
east side of the falls, switchbacking steeply upward before petering out. Paul Hodge's 
book "Mt. Rainier Trails" describes it aptly as <i>"An abandoned trail that presently 
leads nowhere and does it awkwardly"</i>.

Hike or bike 4 miles up the once-road-now-trail Carbon River, then cross the river, enjoy 
the pretty waterfall, and start climbing. This route is clearly still used on a regular 
basis, but only by elk, whose droppings are plentiful. As of 2022 I found it 
navigationally straightforward although overgrown with salal in places. I didn't count 
the number of blowdowns, but there were at least a dozen big ones that required my full 
complement of climbing over, crawling under, or scrambling around abilities.

Past the National Park boundary, the trail becomes fainter. I was no longer enjoying the 
density of blowdowns and lacked a reason to continue, so turned around.

It's unclear to me why this trail exists. There are no views, and it doesn't take you to 
anywhere in particular. Perhaps this is why it was abandoned? :-) One theory is that it's 
a remnant of the North Boundary Trail, which was used to patrol for poachers in the early 
days of the National Park. Another is that it once continued to the east all the way up 
to Windy Gap, before the modern Northern Loop trail was created. I would love to hear 
from anyone who has better information about the history of this route!

Reasons to hike here: adventure. Glorious temperate rainforest. Really big trees. The 
kind of deep solitude where you know you are distant from all other humans in time as 
well as space. Lack of footprints ahead of you along the trail.

I have read several people describing spooky experiences here and believing the trail to 
be haunted, but I experienced nothing like that. The area is lonely and primordial but I 
felt welcome.

Adding to my sense of adventure, the bridge over the Carbon River was out when I visited, 
so I had to ford the river. I would not attempt this at other times of year, but in March 
the water was running clear rather than glacial silty so I could see the bottom, and I 
found a spot where it was wide and shallow enough to only come a bit above my knees.
