Glacier Basin
moderate to hard (depending on route)
9.8 2880 6650
older

[Trail.jpg] Heading upward along the trail to Glacier Basin
[GlacierBasin.jpg] Glacier Basin, just past the campsite, on a day with too much cloud to see the peaks that surround it
[Moraine.jpg] Further up Glacier Basin, following the climbers trail along a glacial moraine
[InterGlacier.jpg] Up close and personal with the Inter Glacier
[EmmonsGlacier.jpg] Snout of the Emmons Glacier, viewed from the Emmons Moraine side spur
[EmmonsMeltwater.jpg] Unnamed lake filled and colored by glacial meltwater

This hike is reported elsewhere as being significantly shorter than the 
numbers I'm giving above. Usually more like 6 miles with 1600' elevation 
gain.

That's what happens if you start at the White River campsite, hike up 
alongside the Inter Fork of the White River, and turn around at the 'End of 
Maintained Trail' sign by the Glacier Basin backcountry camp. It's a 
pleasant enough hike, through varied forest with occasional more open views, 
and the high basin that you enter at the end of the trail is quite beautiful.

You're really missing the point if this is all you hike, though. Far greater 
rewards are to be had by going further.

First off, a mile from the trailhead there's a side spur to the left 
signposted Emmons Moraine. This adds 2 miles and 500' elevation gain, and is 
well worth taking. Emmons Glacier is a monster (largest surface area of any 
glacier in the contiguous United States!) and this is a great place to see 
it from. You can usually also see a lake filled by its meltwater, which is 
colored turquoise by suspended glacial silt. I find it amazing to think how 
this water was only recently liberated from hundreds of years deep freeze 
within a glacier, during which time it was grinding this rock down to an 
ever finer grade of silt.

Better still, when you reach the end of the official trail at the entrance 
to Glacier Basin, an unofficial but easy to follow climbers trail continues 
upward through the basin. It ascends a glacial moraine to the base of the 
Inter Glacier, at which point this becomes a climbing route to the summit 
which requires special equipment and skills. Don't venture onto the glacier 
if you lack these, but do continue up the basin as far as you want. It's 
super cool, my favorite part of this trail.

The Glacier Basin trail also forms part of the [GlacierBasinLoop].
