Camp Muir
omg yikes wtf
8.5 4700 10100
older

[Onwards.jpg] Climbing the snowfield, looking down on the Tatoosh Range so far below
[Upwards.jpg] No solitude here. By this point Mount Adams is almost across-at rather than up-at
[NearlyThere.jpg] Nearly there! I was moving SO SLOW this last half mile
[CampMuir.jpg] Camp Muir, way up above the clouds
[NisquallyCrevasses.jpg] Looking down onto the heavily crevassed Nisqually Glacier
[SunHat.jpg] Towel + hat = sun protection
[SolidEarth.jpg] It was a strange feeling to walk on solid earth again after so many hours on snow

I had been intrigued and intimidated by Camp Muir ever since first falling 
in love with Mount Rainier, hiking [PanoramaPoint], and wondering where that 
path heading on upward signposted Pebble Creek went. My Day Hike Mount 
Rainier book says:

<i>"It's actually an alpine ascent that shouldn't be attempted by people 
without proper training and gear. We include it here to warn serious hikers 
to go prepared, and, frankly, to dissuade the inexperienced and ill-equipped 
from going at all."</i>

So for years I did not go at all.

Then in 2017 I decided to hike to Muir as a challenge and celebration of 
having got into better shape. It was incredible. Physically intense and 
spiritually exhilarating. Pictures don't do it justice.

This route is the dividing line between hiking and climbing. It's the 
highest you can get on Rainier without a climbing permit and glacier travel 
skills. You will be literally above the clouds, breathing thin air, looking 
down on the heavily crevassed glaciers which surround this thin spit of 
I-can-get-here-with-nothing-but-hiking-boots terrain.

Start at Paradise. Hike up [PanoramaPoint], cutting left if you want to 
minimize distance, but I recommend veering right to Panorama Point for a 
nice refuel spot. Onward and upward past Pebble Creek (last chance to refill 
water bottles) and onto a year-round permanent snowfield. Then up, and up, 
and up some more, until you eventually reach a high camp consisting of a 
couple of stone buildings and many tents pitched by climbers who stay here 
the night before their Rainier summit attempts.

This hike is uniquely hard and dangerous for several reasons:

First off, it's a lot of elevation gain, and you'll be on snow most of the 
way. Depending on conditions you might want snowshoes (if the snow is soft) 
or spikes (if the snow is hard and icy). I carried spikes but not snowshoes 
both times I've hiked to Muir.

Second, the altitude. Ten thousand feet is categorically different to the 
6-7 thousand of other high Rainier trails. If you came from sea level, you 
will tire faster and move slower than you are used to. You will dehydrate 
much faster than normal, which is a bad thing because dehydration increases 
the risk of altitude sickness (I carried 3 liters of water, which was barely 
enough). High altitude sunlight reflected off snow will burn your skin even 
as the wind chills you to the bone (in spite of frequent lotion applications 
and careful clothing choices, I ended up with sunburn on the inside of my 
nostrils).

These factors are just nuisances, though, compared to the weather. You know 
those days when you look at Rainier from Seattle, and the summit is clear, 
and the lower slopes are clear, but there's a pretty bit of cloud hanging 
off the mountain part way up? When you hike to Muir, you'll be INSIDE that 
cloud. This can happen any time, any day, any season. It happened to me near 
the end of my second Muir hike, thankfully after we were down off the main 
snowfield, but it was still crazy spooky. Even crossing a small patch of 
snow, all we could see was white in every direction: white ground, white air 
- now wait, which way were we going again?

The problem if this happens while on the Muir snowfield is the surrounding 
terrain. To the east, there are cliffs. To the west, the Nisqually Glacier, 
which is riddled with potentially life-ending crevasses. The latter is 
particularly dangerous because the natural fall line of the snowfield leads 
straight onto the glacier, so it takes conscious effort and good visibility 
to stay on the route back down to Paradise.

To hike here safely, I recommend a combination of waiting for good weather, 
multiple navigation techniques (map, compass, GPS, and the skill to use 
them: this is not the place to for instance ignore the difference between 
magnetic and true north!) plus enough food and shelter that if you get 
confused you can just hunker down and wait for conditions to improve.

Dangers aside, once you're onto the snowfield this route is pretty much just 
an uphill slog. At least during good weather, there is no solitude to be 
had. At times it felt like a conveyer belt of people heading up the snow, 
but this was a good thing because it would have been spooky/scary if I was 
on my own. Of course you will pass people who are hiking to Muir wearing 
tennis shoes, t-shirt and shorts, carrying nothing but a water bottle. 
That's fine, up until the moment when it isn't. Don't be like them :-(

On the way back down, you have a choice between glissading (aka sliding) and 
plunge stepping. Climbers will be horrified at the idea of glissading 
without an ice ax (how would you self-arrest in an emergency?) but hey. Both 
times I hiked to Muir, the snow was soft enough that the problem was how to 
get sliding fast enough rather than how to stop. I was only able to glissade 
down the steeper sections, using my waterproof leggings for maximum 
slipperiness. Others had brought trash bags or even full sleds to ride down 
on. It's important to check out the entire glissade run before starting down 
one, though. One near the bottom ended in a big sinkhole that would have 
hurt if someone had fallen into it at speed.

When I wasn't sliding down, I learned how to plunge step. That's when you 
kinda half run down the mountain, letting gravity take care of digging your 
forward foot into the snow. In the right conditions you can go quite fast 
with minimal exertion. Much fun, but only recommended on soft snow with no 
rocks.

The National Park Service 
<a href="https://www.nps.gov/mora/planyourvisit/upload/Camp-Muir-Route-with-Get-Your-Bearings-map-Jan18.pdf">provides a PDF</a>
with information and compass bearings for the Camp Muir route.
