South Puyallup Pipe Organ
moderate
11 2170 4190
Westside Road
South Puyallup River
2020

[MountWow.jpg] Mount Wow looms above the Westside Road, huger and more hulking than any photo can capture
[Lahar.jpg] Remnants of a lahar that crossed the Westside Road: mud, rocks, and dead trees
[TahomaCreek.jpg] Tahoma Creek next to the Westside Road
[MarineMemorial.jpg] The Marine Memorial
[PipeOrgan.jpg] The Devil's Pipe Organ (columnar andesite)
[SouthPuyallup.jpg] South Puyallup River from the Wonderland bridge
[PipeOrganCloseup.jpg] Zooming in on the Pipe Organ

Hike or bike 3.5 miles up an abandoned road, then hike 2 miles along a delightful forest 
path, to a remarkable columnar andesite formation known as the Devil's Pipe Organ.

The Westside Road was originally planned as the first step toward a network of roads that 
would encircle the mountain. It starts near the southwest Nisqually entrance, and was 
intended to connect all the way to the Carbon River in the north, thus opening up the 
rugged west side of the park to the growing crowds of Rainier visitors. By 1932 
construction had reached as far as the North Puyallup River, when high costs and shifting 
priorities led to this project being cancelled.

Rainier was not a fan of her west side being made more accessible. From miles three to 
four the road passes between Tahoma Creek and the cliffs of Mount Wow, and this is the 
most tectonically active region of the volcano. Steep cliffs plus earthquakes means 
boulders regularly being dropped onto the road below, while glacier-fed river plus 
earthquakes means frequent lahars (destructive mudflows). Over time the [TahomaCreek] 
trail (which used to run alongside Tahoma Creek starting from the Westside Road) was 
abandoned, and in 1990 the road itself was closed to vehicles at Dry Creek. Remoteness 
restored!

Drive 3 miles up the Westside Road and park at the closure. Ignore the warning sign about 
entering an active geohazard zone, while marveling at the sights of lahar debris, rocks 
fallen from Mount Wow, and the wide valley of Tahoma Creek with its unusual population of 
killed yet still standing trees (root systems suffocated by the weight of mud and rocks 
dumped above them).

Mount Wow is named, not as you might guess for the expression commonly uttered by those 
seeing it for the first time, but after the Yakama word for 'goat'.

After leaving the hazard zone the road switchbacks gradually up to Round Pass, where 
you'll find the Marine Memorial. This is a boulder inscribed with the names of 32 men who 
died during a storm in December 1946, when their transport plane crashed into the South 
Tahoma Glacier at around 10,000'. The bodies were never recovered.

Shortly before the memorial, the Round Pass trail branches off to the right. It descends 
through forest before joining the South Puyallup trail, where you again turn right and 
climb gradually alongside (but with no views of) the river.

The highlight of this hike is the Devil's Pipe Organ, located opposite the toilet at 
South Puyallup River Camp. This is a hillside where andesite lava cooled into a hexagonal 
columnar formation. It's really quite amazing. Even the debris that's fallen away from 
the cliff over the years is perfectly hexagonal, with straight-edged artificial looking 
boulders littering the ground below.

A few hundred feet further, turn left onto the [Wonderland] and descend a short 
distance for a nice view from the sturdy bridge over the South Puyallup River (no easily 
washed away log crossings here). Or continue another 4 miles to [KlapatchePark].

The Westside Road portion of this trail doubles as the start of the [GobblersKnob] hike.
