Grand Park via Lake Eleanor
moderate
9 1680 5690
Lake Eleanor
2020

[-Panorama.jpg] Panoramic view from the middle of Grand Park, with Mount Fremont to the left
[LakeEleanor.jpg] Lake Eleanor
[LowerPark.jpg] Lower (Lesser Grand?) park area
[GrandPark.jpg] Mountain views astound the whole way through Grand Park
[Viewpoint.jpg] Overlooking the Winthrop Glacier and West Fork White River, from a short distance along the Northern Loop trail

Grand Park is what happens when lava flows in such a way as to somehow create a mile long 
and perfectly flat open area at 5600' elevation. It can be reached along the [GrandPark] 
trail, or by this shorter and significantly easier side entrance.

The distance shown above includes an optional (but highly recommended) extension along 
the [NorthernLoop] trail to a stunning viewpoint. If you skip that and turn around at the 
junction between the Lake Eleanor and Northern Loop trails, the hike is 8.2 miles 
roundtrip. If you only go as far as the start of Grand Park, it's 6.4 miles.

The trailhead is ever so slightly outside Mount Rainier National Park, along Forest Road 
73, which means no pass required to park here. It also means 10 miles driving up a 
potholed dirt road. As of 2020 this was fine in my low clearance electric car (better 
than Mowich Lake Road), but it took about 30 minutes.

A sign at the trailhead confidently states "ELEANOR CREEK / ELEV. 2980". It is wrong. You 
are at 4500' elevation here.

The trail climbs gradually through a mile of forest to Lake Eleanor. Next comes a 
delightful level forest section, and then a slight descent to an open area which offers 
the first summit view. This flat meadow is like a teaser trailer for Grand Park itself. 
Perhaps it should be called Lower Grand Park, or Lesser Grand Park? Or we could pull a 
musical joke and call it Upright Park.

After more climbing through forest, you'll arrive at Grand Park itself, along with the 
kind of summit views that'll make you thankful for digital cameras where you don't have 
to worry about wasting film. From here on, everything is pretty much flat. Call it a day 
if you want, or continue another mile through Grand Park. When the Lake Eleanor trail 
joins up with the [NorthernLoop], I recommend turning right and hiking another 0.4 
levelish miles to a stunning viewpoint over the West Fork White River.

Thanks to its gentle gradient, lack of avalanche terrain, and access from a forest road 
that remains open when the major Rainier roads are closed for winter, this can be a great 
snowshoeing or winter camping trail. Just be careful of the road itself in icy 
conditions, as there are several steep and exposed sections!
