Indian Henry's from Kautz Creek
moderate
todo todo todo
2019

[ApproachingIndianHenrys.jpg] TODO
[MirrorLake.jpg] TODO
[SunsetAmphitheater.jpg] TODO
[Trail.jpg] TODO

I've hiked to Indian Henry's from Longmire a couple of times before, but this was my first time along the Kautz Creek trail, so I thought it would be useful to compare the two routes.

Going via the Wonderland section that starts at Longmire is 14 miles roundtrip, with 3,200 feet gain, but it breaks that up with some climbing, a descent, then more climbing.  Most of the hike is through forest without views, but there are some pretty river crossings.

The Kautz Creek route is slightly shorter (11 miles roundtrip) and steeper (3,800 feet gain), but it felt significantly more strenuous because it's aggressively uphill all the way.  This trail has something of the personality of a Mailbox!  It also delivers views much earlier on in the hike, first south to Adams and then a series of Rainier peek-a-boos.  If you're anything like me, more than once when the route opens out into a meadow and starts gently downhill you will think "cracked it, this must be the hunting grounds now".  But no - it does that several times only to head sharply back uphill before you've even managed to catch your breath :-)

Overall I think I prefer the Kautz Creek route, but starting in Longmire is definitely an easier way to see this beautiful place.

Whichever route you take, I strongly recommend adding the extra two miles going on to Mirror Lakes.  This side trail is less well maintained, with several broken (yet safely passable) bridges, and water on the trail.  When you reach the "end of maintained trail" sign shortly before the second (tiny) lake, carry on straight forward another 200 feet (not following the path to the right).  It doesn't look like there's a path going straight at first, but you will soon find yourself on a clear path - this is the start of the climbers route that leads to the Success Cleaver.  No need to go far down it as right by the start you will enjoy stunning views down onto the Tahoma Glacier and head of its valley.

Flowers mostly done.  Fall colors not quite started yet.  Berries delicious.
