Longmire to Reflection Lakes
moderate
11.4 2550 4890
Longmire
Cougar Rock, Paradise River
2019

[ForestTrail.jpg] Mossy forest trail from Longmire to the Nisqually crossing
[UpTheNisqually.jpg] Wintry view up the Nisqually Valley
[NisquallyInWinter.jpg] Crossing the Nisqually River in early winter
[Nisqually.jpg] Crossing the Nisqually River, late fall edition
[MadcapFalls.jpg] Madcap Falls
[Narada2.jpg] Narada Falls, during the spring melt
[NaradaFalls.jpg] Narada Falls, halfway through the process of freezing for the winter
[IconicView.jpg] The iconic view from Reflection Lakes is kinda like a hurricane path: if it doesn't do what you want, you can fix it with a sharpie

The section of the [Wonderland] between Longmire and Reflection Lakes is not 
typically considered one of its highlights, but makes a great off-season day 
hike (the distance shown here is roundtrip). In summer this lacks solitude 
because it parallels the road for the first mile plus rejoins it near Cougar 
Rock, by Narada Falls, and at Reflection Lakes themselves. Early or late in the 
season, though, the road to Reflection Lakes will be closed for winter, and the 
main road up to Paradise doesn't open until 9 AM. Even after the road gate at 
Longmire opens, traffic volume is much lower than the busy summer.

Once freed from traffic noise, this is a lovely trail. Mostly forest, but there 
are great views from the Nisqually river crossing and at Reflection Lakes. Also 
multiple excellent waterfalls. The view of Carter Falls is partially 
obstructed, but there's a clear view of the smaller Madcap Falls just beyond 
it. Further up the trail, a short detour on the left leads to the spectacular 
Narada Falls, where in summer you'll share the overlook with countless tourists 
who came here by road.

The section from Longmire to the Nisqually crossing just past Cougar Rock makes 
a great easy snowshoe route: 3.6 miles roundtrip with 440' elevation gain. From 
Cougar Rock to Carter Falls is 2.7 miles roundtrip with 570' gain. Be careful 
crossing the Nisqually both in winter (when the log bridge may be icy) and 
summer (when it sometimes gets washed away).
