Sheep Lake and Sourdough Gap
moderate (or easy if you stop at Sheep Lake)
6.9 2000 6400
Cayuse Pass
Sheep Lake
older

[Trail.jpg] Trail hugs the side of the Rainier Fork American River valley, with road below
[SheepLake.jpg] Fall reflections in Sheep Lake
[SheepLake2.jpg] Sheep Lake with early season glacier lilies
[AboveSheepLake.jpg] Looking down on Sheep Lake from above
[-Panorama.jpg] View over the Morse Creek drainage, from Sourdough Gap
[Dramatic.jpg] Looking back from just inside the National Park
[Summit.jpg] Summit view from just inside the National Park

This trail has the dubious distinction of not being inside Mount Rainier 
National Park at all. It's actually a section of the Pacific Crest Trail, 
slightly outside the eastern park boundary. That means you can bring dogs!

Start at Chinook Pass, and hike northeast along a level section of trail that 
hugs the steep side of the valley, parallel to but above the road. You often 
won't see the road, but you sure can hear it.

After a mile and a half the trail separates from the road (hurrah, no more 
traffic noise) and enters forest before passing Sheep Lake, where you are 
likely to see tents and encounter smelly PCT backpackers. Being outside the 
National Park, camping here does not require permits and there are no toilets 
or bear poles.

After Sheep Lake the trail heads more steeply uphill, trees dropping away as 
you approach the rocky and impressive high pass named Sourdough Gap. This is 
actually a double pass, linking three separate drainages within a quarter of a 
mile. First you leave the Rainier Fork American River drainage to gaze over the 
headwaters of Morse Creek, then continue a short distance straight ahead after 
the PCT veers off to the right, traverse a scree slope, leave the Morse 
Creek drainage for the Crystal Lakes one, and enter Rainier National Park.

If you're anything like me you'll have been missing the lack of Rainier summit 
views so far. Immediately ahead, as the trail loses altitude, you'll find some 
tasty views of Her Majesty. No dogs allowed on this last stretch, though. 
Thanks T for hanging onto ours at the park boundary while I sprinted ahead!

If you want to go further, continue on the [CrystalLakes] trail, which drops 
steeply from here down to WA 410. Would be neat to through-hike if you can 
arrange a car at both ends.
