Shriner Peak
strenuous
8.2 3490 5840
Ohanapecosh
Shriner Peak
2020

[-Panorama.jpg] Panoramic view from the top of Shriner Peak includes the Cowlitz Divide, Indian Bar, and Cowlitz Chimneys
[SwitchbackSouth.jpg] Every time a switchback headed one way, I got to look at Adams and the Ohanapecosh valley
[SwitchbackWest.jpg] Then each time a switchback turned the other way, my view changed to Her Majesty
[ThereAlready.jpg] The views were so mesmerizing, this popped up in front of me long before I was expecting to be done climbing :-)
[Lookout.jpg] At the old fire lookout
[Trail.jpg] Unusual (for Rainier) mix of trees and shrub in old burn areas along the trail

This underappreciated, and hence uncrowded, trail climbs to an abandoned fire lookout 
dating from the 1930's. As is the wont of fire lookouts there are stupendous views in all 
directions: east and north over the Cascades, south to Mount Adams, Mount St. Helens, and 
the Ohanapecosh Valley, and of course west to Rainier itself.

The trail starts in forest, then enters a unique landscape created by an old burn which 
has left small groups of trees separated by open areas where new trees are just starting 
to grow back. In the meantime there's a brushy mix of ferns, wild strawberries, 
huckleberries, and wildflowers. These lower altitude treeless areas allow the stunning 
views to start up nice and early during the hike. Higher up, the brush is replaced by 
more typical subalpine vegetation.

Other online guides warn that this trail is exposed and hot, going so far as to suggest 
it best saved for a fall hike. Such was not my experience on a sunny day in August, 
however. It helped that I started early (on the trail by 8 AM) as the trail climbs a 
southwest facing slope which doesn't receive direct sun until late morning. But also, the 
first third of the hike is forest, and even once into the burn area I found shade was 
plentiful (as of 2020). I wonder if brush and trees have grown back enough to make a 
difference in the years since the other guides were written?

The trail was completely dry when I hiked it. Bring lots of water, especially if you are 
camping here!
