Emerald Ridge
strenuous
15.9 3520 5650
Westside Road
South Puyallup River
2021

[Forest.jpg] Hiking through lush old growth forest
[Washout.jpg] Washed out section of trail, as of 2024
[Ridge.jpg] Ascending a narrow ridge
[Arriving.jpg] Arriving at the top of Emerald Ridge
[Carpet.jpg] A lush carpet of emerald studded with flowers
[Backward.jpg] The view behind you is no slouch either
[-Panorama.jpg] View from the top of Emerald Ridge
[Desolation.jpg] Continuing south (dotted part of the map above) into a desolation of moraines and lahar debris
[Bridge.jpg] Tahoma Creek suspension bridge (end of the dotted part of the map)

Many [Wonderland] hikers describe the Emerald Ridge area as one of their favorite 
special places around the mountain. It's also possible to visit here as a long day hike 
by heading up the closed-to-cars Westside Road, hiking the South Puyallup trail to 
[SouthPuyallupPipeOrgan], then turning right onto the Wonderland Trail.

If you ride a bike up the Westside Road, the hiking portion is reduced to 6.9 miles with 
2200' elevation gain.

The hike starts through lush old growth forest, then ascends the spine of a ridge that 
seems at times implausibly narrow. Footing is sometimes loose and rocky, and there 
are several spots where it would be uncool to slip.

Erosion is affecting this trail as parts of the ridge periodically fall away. A section 
at the top of the ridge was rerouted in 2021 after the previous trail location collapsed. 
Lower down, there's a short but steadily deepening washout, pictured here as of 2024. 
Some of the trail remains, but it is narrow and a long way down! If you don't fancy the 
look of this, it's possible to bypass the washout by scrambling over the top of the ridge.

After climbing and climbing and climbing some more, arriving at the top of the ridge will 
instantly heal all soreness while taking your breath away for a different reason than 
the climb. This is a relatively level marvel of lush vegetation, often carpeted with 
incredible blooms of flowers, marmots everywhere, overlooking the Tahoma Glacier which is 
stained orange by mountains of pulverized rock, while above you lie the glorious heights 
of Tahoma herself.

If your legs and lungs are up for more, continue south along the Wonderland as it 
descends from Emerald Ridge. This takes you into a fascinatingly desolate landscape of 
glacial moraines and debris from the countless lahars that have scoured this area over 
the centuries. 2600 years ago, the Round Pass mudflow came from Sunset Amphitheater above 
you to the left, and 500 years ago the Electron mudflow originated from the headwall of 
the Tahoma Glacier above you to the right. Combined with countless smaller more recent 
lahars and the moraines of recent glacial retreat, they've left this area a mess. The 
mountain looks ancient and broken here, lacking even a proper summit.

Continue as far as you like. An additional 3.9 miles round trip with 1450' elevation 
loss/gain will take you all the way to the spectacular and fun-to-cross suspension bridge 
over Tahoma Creek. This section of trail is shown as the dotted portion of the map, and 
not included in the above distance figures.
