Nisqually Boundary Trail
unmaintained and very steep
4 2600 4060
Longmire
none
2022

[Trailhead.jpg] Unmarked trailhead is along the loop used by cars exiting the park, to the east of the driveway which accesses a couple of staff buildings
[Stump.jpg] Rainforest stump
[TenasCreek.jpg] Crossing Tenas Creek
[Snag.jpg] Mossy nursery snag
[Marker.jpg] You'll find National Park boundary markers fastened to trees at regular intervals along this trail
[Ridge.jpg] My turnaround point at the ridge
[SunshinePoint.jpg] Abandoned car campsite at Sunshine Point, now separated from the road by a side channel of the Nisqually River

I've always loved entering Mount Rainier National Park at Nisqually. It's an instant hit 
of over-the-top verdancy, flamboyant in its lushness. Always struck me as a shame to just 
drive past this area on my way to Longmire or Paradise.

Well, what do you know: there's an old trail that starts here, right by the park 
entrance! Boundary trails were used in the early days of the National Park to patrol for 
poachers and other illegal activities. This one heads due north along the edge of the 
park. It's a rigid map-and-compass approach to trail design, having been created for 
administrative rather than recreational purposes. The path climbs steeply, descends a 
bit, crosses Tenas Creek, and then climbs a lot more getting REALLY steep near the end, 
all without straying more than a few hundred feet from the park boundary line. Quite a 
different feel from the old Taidnapam trail up [BackboneRidge], which follows the flow of 
its terrain rather than a line on a map.

This trail is no longer maintained, but in 2022 I found it easy to follow. The many 
blowdowns were mostly on the smaller side so I could step over them without much in the 
way of acrobatics. Tenas Creek has no bridge and the area around it was muddy, but I 
forded with no trouble other than wet feet.

I ended my hike upon reaching the top of the ridge, which offers limited glimpses through 
trees over the Nisqually Valley. Climbers can turn east here, continuing another 2 miles 
up the ridgeline to the top of Mount Wow.

There is no public parking at this trailhead, as the buildings around the Nisqually 
Entrance are used for park administration and employee residences. Some hikers have 
reported success asking the entrance booth staff nicely if there's a space available that 
day, but while friendly they had nothing for me. Alternatives are to find a spot outside 
the park and walk in, or drive on to the pullout near the Westside Road and walk back 
(which I did).

While walking the road section back to my car I enjoyed taking a look at the remnants of 
the Sunshine Point campground. This used to be a car camping site, but the Nisqually 
River reclaimed much of it during the floods of 2006. As of 2022 you can still see a 
levelled area with clearings, now separated from the road by a channel of the river.
