Bald Rock
strenuous and off-trail
9.1 3100 5400
Ohanapecosh
Nickel Creek
2023

[Turnoff.jpg] Turning off the Wonderland toward Bald Rock
[Forest.jpg] Following a fragment of unofficial path
[Open.jpg] The hike is mostly forest, but there are occasional open patches
[Summit.jpg] Tahoma, from Bald Rock

This is an off-trail route. Only come here if your navigation is up to the task of 
finding your way where there are no trails to follow, and practice Leave No Trace to 
avoid damaging fragile terrain.

Most of the distance and elevation gain shown above comes from hiking up the [Wonderland] 
from Box Canyon toward [IndianBar]. If you already happen to be passing here, adding in 
the off-trail route to Bald Rock is 1.7 miles roundtrip with 700' gain.

Off-trail hiking on Rainier does not mean there are no paths to follow. If I've heard of 
a place and decided to hike there, it's a safe bet that many thousands will have done the 
same before. Wherever people go, their feet make paths. Sometimes these paths are 
helpful, following wise routes that are easy to follow. Other times they used to make 
sense before the landscape changed, trees fell blocking them, etc. Sometimes a path will 
seem promising but then peter out to nothing. Sometimes a good looking path resulted from 
a mistake made by a hiker of years past, who left footprints before realizing their error 
and backtracking. Other later visitors saw these footprints, copied the mistake, and 
strengthened the path. I was taken in by at least one such false route, doing my part to 
increase its visibility so it can continue to trick more hikers over the years to come :-)

That's a long way of saying: rely on your own skills to navigate here!

The route is mostly through forest, initially descending, then climbing quite steeply to 
the rocky summit. Unless you're much wiser at choosing where to walk than I was, expect 
to be doing quite a bit of pushing branches out of your face.

Views from the top are nice, but honestly not that different from what you can see far 
more easily directly from the Wonderland.
