Naches Peak Loop
easy
4.2 860 5900
Cayuse Pass
none
2021

[TipsooLake.jpg] View from the far side of Tipsoo Lake
[Naches.jpg] Naches Peak behind Tipsoo Lake
[EarlySeason.jpg] Tipsoo Lake during the spring melt, when the trail is a pond but it is oh so important to stay on it regardless, to avoid damaging that 'dead ground' which will soon be glorious wildflowers
[Trail.jpg] Along the trail
[Lake.jpg] Unnamed lake
[DeweyLake.jpg] Dewey Lake, southeast along the Pacific Crest Trail
[Mountain.jpg] Iconic view of the mountain
[Mountain2.jpg] I can't resist one more photo from this iconic spot

Naches Peak is one of the most popular trails at Rainier, and for good reason. It circles 
around the sides (rather than ascending to the top of) a peak, making for an easy hike 
without too much elevation gain, at high enough altitude to offer views pretty much the 
entire way, and these views are constantly changing as you circle around the peak. Also, 
wildflowers. What's not to like?

Well, the crowds for a start :-) I began my hike at 7 AM, and had the trail pretty much 
to myself except for the last 15 minutes when the daytime hordes arrived...

If I were a better person, I would look past the shouting back and forth between widely 
separated members of a party, obliviousness when a faster hiker is wanting to pass, and 
failure to thank others who correctly yield the trail to uphill hikers, thinking hey, at 
least they're out here appreciating and sharing in this wonderful place. When someone 
tramples wildflowers or creates new erosion paths by cutting a switchback, I'd think it's 
good that they're hiking, developing a love that may someday deepen into knowledge and 
future conservation efforts.

I guess I'm not such a good person, though, because I find crowds of newbie hikers 
irritating! Get here early if you want to avoid them.

There are two access points to the loop: by Tipsoo Lake, or a half mile further up WA 
410. Hiking clockwise will have you facing toward the best views of Rainier, including a 
ridiculously photogenic spot toward the southeast of the loop where the mountain is 
framed behind a small lake. For those not wanting to walk so far, there's a short, flat, 
and attractive loop around Tipsoo Lake right by the first trailhead.

Tipsoo means 'grassy, hairy' in the Chinook Jargon.
Naches means 'turbulent water' in the Sahaptin language of the Yakama.

Only half of this loop lies inside Mount Rainier National Park, while the other half 
doubles as a section of the Pacific Crest Trail. Say hi to any long distance backpackers 
you encounter here, and note that dogs are allowed on the PCT section but not inside the 
National Park.
