Rampart Ridge Loop
easy
4.8 1470 4100
Longmire
none
2019

[Viewpoint.jpg] View from the open section along Rampart Ridge
[Beware.jpg] Pay attention to avalanche danger before crossing this short section!
[Ent.jpg] Lower parts of the trail are lush and rainforesty
[Cabin.jpg] Historic cabin along the Trail of the Shadows, built by the Longmire family in 1888. Note the iron deposits and melted snow due to a mineral spring behind the cabin
[HotSprings.jpg] Back in the day the Longmire family built stonework around several mineral springs along the Trail of the Shadows, hoping to establish a spa. Their venture failed, but their construction remains. The springs aren't exactly hot, but warm enough to clear a gap in the snow

Rampart Ridge is a straightforward loop hike starting from Longmire. Its 
eastern side is also the start of the [IndianHenrysFromLongmire] [Wonderland] 
section, and [MildredPoint].

Most of the trail is through forest, which is splendidly lush and 
rainforesty at the lower elevations. Along the way there's a nice overlook 
of the buildings at Longmire, and a short open section with a great view up 
the valley of Kautz Creek toward Rainier's summit. I recommend hiking the 
loop clockwise so you'll be facing toward the best view at this spot.

Due to its lower altitude, this hike is sometimes accessible during the 
off-season when higher trails are snowed in. It also makes a good snowshoe 
route: just beware avalanche risk across the short open section.

The start of the Rampart Ridge trail doubles as the beginning of the 0.7 
mile Trail of the Shadows, which circles around a marsh past several mineral 
springs and remnants of the historical Longmire Springs Hotel. This was 
constructed by the Longmire family in 1890, before the creation of the 
National Park, and largely dismantled in 1920. Leftovers include an old log 
cabin, and rock walls built around several of the hot springs. Their plan to 
create a spa here didn't really make sense (the spring water isn't 
particularly hot, its minerals are just smelly rather than therapeutic, and 
their execution of the idea was, shall we say, not particularly polished) 
but nevertheless this is an important piece of Rainier history.
