Gobblers Knob
moderate
11.6 2660 5440
Westside Road
Lake George
2020

[TahomaCreek.jpg] Lahar devastation along Tahoma Creek (seen from the Westside Road)
[LakeGeorge.jpg] Lake George
[Trail.jpg] Nearing the end of the climb
[GobblersKnob.jpg] Approaching the Gobblers Knob fire lookout
[View1.jpg] View from the fire lookout
[View2.jpg] View in a different direction
[View3.jpg] Oops, I nearly forgot to look in the most magnificent direction of them all :-)

Walk or bike for 3.5 miles up the closed-to-vehicles Westside Road, which is also the 
first part of the [SouthPuyallupPipeOrgan] and [KlapatchePark] hikes. Although this road 
section is more than half of the total distance to Gobblers Knob, it will pass quickly as 
footing is easy and the gradient gentle. The road passes through the most tectonically 
active area of Rainier National Park (hence its closure!) so you'll get to enjoy sights 
of rockfall, lahar debris, and the flood prone Tahoma Creek.

At Round Pass, just before the Marine Memorial, the Gobblers Knob trail takes off to the 
left. It climbs through forest, then levels out and arrives at Lake George after 0.8 
miles with 500' elevation gain. The lake is large, tranquil, and home to several 
campsites plus a ranger patrol cabin.

After passing to the right of the lake, the trail climbs 1200' over another 1.4 miles, to 
the steep-sided Gobblers Knob. This is home to one of Rainier's four remaining fire 
lookouts, built in 1932 and still in great condition although no longer used for fire 
watch which is done aerially these days.

The climb is mostly forested, but the steep hillside means tree cover to your side is 
thin enough that you'll keep catching glimpses of white glaciers forming a distant 
backdrop to the pine needles. It's magical and extremely motivating to tired legs.

At the lookout, there's a 360&deg; panorama of stupendous views. Rainier is of course the 
grandest of all, with the Tahoma Glacier perched directly above the South Puyallup River 
valley, Tahoma Creek valley to the right, and Emerald Ridge (beloved of Wonderlanders) in 
between.

Although totally reachable by sturdy day hikers, this trail is not well known. On a sunny 
Sunday in August, we only passed maybe a dozen other people, most of whom were 
backpacking.
