Eagle Peak Saddle
moderate
7.7 3030 5770
Longmire
none
2020

[NisquallySuspensionBridge.jpg] The Nisqually Suspension Bridge
[Meadow.jpg] Final set of switchbacks up through meadow to the saddle
[StHelens.jpg] Looking south, Mount St. Helens (shown here), Adams, and sometimes even Hood are visible on a clear day
[Adams.jpg] Mount Adams
[Saddle.jpg] Eagle Peak Saddle
[Rainier.jpg] Looking north, the Nisqually Glacier and river valley, Paradise, and Muir Snowfield are splendidly clear

It's a quadfecta of volcanoes! One of the few spots in which you can spin in a circle and 
see all of Mounts Rainier, Adams, St. Helens, and Hood, without moving an inch.

Starting at Longmire, walk past the Park Service housing and cross the Nisqually River on 
a sturdy and attractive wooden suspension bridge. This was built in 1923-24 to reach a 
car campground, reconstructed to support heavier vehicles in 1951, and reconstructed 
again in 2005. The campground closed to the public in 1989, becoming the
[LongmireStewardshipCampground].

Shortly past the bridge, turn left onto the trail, then climb through forest. And climb, 
then climb some more. Eventually the forest gives way to alpine meadow, and the gradient 
increases. A final set of very steep switchbacks leads to a rocky saddle in between Eagle 
Peak and Chutla Peak, where the maintained trail ends (although skilled climbers can 
continue to the top of either peak). It's worth exploring a short distance to the right, 
where you'll find a bench and a less obstructed view of Rainier, but be wary of the 
drop-offs both sides of this saddle.

The view of Rainier to the north is simply astounding. Close enough to make out every 
detail of the buildings at Paradise, the snowfield route heading up from there to Camp 
Muir, and crevasses on the upper Nisqually Glacier, but also just far enough away to be 
able to take in the mountain as a whole, unlike closer views where proximity can 
sometimes obscure a full understanding of what you are standing on part of.

Don't forget to turn around, though. To the south you will see Mount Adams, so close it 
feels you could reach out and touch it, Mount St. Helens, and also Mount Hood (which is 
rarely visible from Rainier). Only Baker is missing from this volcano party.

Chutla means 'rock' in the Lushootseed language of the Puget Sound Salish.
