Tolmie Peak
moderate
6.2 1890 5940
2019

[Lookout.jpg] Moon above the Tolmie Peak fire lookout, around 5:30 AM
[RiversOfCloud.jpg] River of cloud flowing over Ipsut Pass
[FantasyLandscape.jpg] Fantasy landscape in the dawn light
[GoodMorning.jpg] Good morning Rainier! (from Tolmie Peak)
[FromTolmiePeak.jpg] Rainier from Tolmie Peak, with Eunice Lake in the foreground

The trail to the old fire lookout at Tolmie Peak is popular, which is a 
polite way of saying crowded. It's easy to see why: this is steep enough to 
offer a workout yet not too long, located on the closest side of Rainier to 
Seattle, and offers an astonishingly well-composed view that couldn't have 
been better designed for the taking of selfies in front of.

Rainier novices who choose this hike because the drive to it seems shorter 
than Paradise or Sunrise are in for an unpleasant surprise, though. The 17 
mile Mowich Lake Road is mostly unpaved, potholed, and very dusty. 
Trailheads further away from Seattle are often actually easier to reach.

Starting at Mowich Lake (which always surprises me with how little it offers 
in the way of views, given how big and blue the lake is) the trail runs 
north for a flattish and forested mile. Here the Wonderland Trail drops away 
to the right over Ipsut Pass, while you continue straight ahead. The route 
dips, then climbs back up, and forest gives way to more open terrain near 
Eunice Lake. Head around the left of the lake, switchback up onto the peak 
behind it, and you're at the fire lookout.

My solution to the problem of crowds was to start early. I hit the trail at 
4 AM, leaving plenty of time to reach the top before dawn. This was my first 
time hiking through woods at night, which turned out to be fun but spooky. 
My headlamp lit the tips of branches from only the closest trees, making the 
forest behind them seem impenetrably black. It was a great relief when the 
one time I saw eyes glowing at me from the distance, they turned out to be 
just a deer!
