Summerland and Panhandle Gap
strenuous
11 3060 6785
White River
Summerland
older

[Summerland.jpg] Summerland (ironically, photographed during the fall)
[Tahomas.jpg] Little Tahoma and Big Tahoma, from Summerland
[LandOfIceAndSnow.jpg] "I come to the land of the ice and snow..."
[Meltwater.jpg] Meltwater lake
[ColorfulRocks.jpg] If I knew more about geology, I could tell you why these rocks are so colorfully pink and blue
[PanhandleGap.jpg] Panhandle Gap (specifically, the gap is the low point of the ridge at the left of this photo)
[TheGap.jpg] Looking up at Panhandle Gap
[FromPandhandleGap.jpg] View to the south from Panhandle Gap, featuring Mount Adams and Mount Hood

The section of [Wonderland] from Fryingpan Creek to Summerland and then on 
to Panhandle Gap is among its finest. This is also accessible as a day hike, so 
the distance shown here is roundtrip. Turning around at Summerland would cut 
out 2.7 miles and 950' of elevation, but miss the best part of the trail.

Parking space at Fryingpan Creek is limited, so it's a good idea to arrive 
early.

The trail sets out through a grand old forest, following alongside and with 
occasional glimpses of Fryingpan Creek. After 3.2 miles it crosses the river 
and the terrain starts to open up with patches of meadow and partial views. One 
mile and a handful of switchbacks later, you arrive at the famous Summerland 
backcountry camp.

Summerland is a gorgeous alpine meadow. It offers grand views upward to the 
mountain, downward and outward over distant foothills, and close-up views of 
happily chattering streams plus of course the obligatory wildflowers. A most 
excellent place to stop, rest, eat, meditate, nap, pray, or whatever else works 
for you. Also a fine place to turn around if you are done for the day.

For backpackers, Summerland is one of the most developed campsites along the 
Wonderland. The group shelter is an actual stone building (built by the 
Civilian Conservation Corps during the Great Depression), while the toilet is 
an actual covered outhouse!

The final stretch of trail from Summerland to Panhandle Gap is where this hike 
elevates itself from good into the realm of the truly magical. Vegetation 
dwindles as you ascend into a land of nothing but rock and water and 
strangeness. Snow patches linger through the summer, and can cover parts of the 
trail as late as August. Water falls down the cliffs above you, bounds over 
rocks in the form of countless streams, and fills turquoise meltwater pools. 
Some of the rocks are tinted pink and blue, to the point where they almost 
appear to be glowing. Other rocks are assembled into cairns, which are helpful 
for staying on the sometimes faint trail. Beware navigation if you're up here 
during bad weather!

Panhandle Gap is the top of the hike, and also the highest point on the entire 
Wonderland Trail. Immediately before it comes a short traverse across a steep 
snowfield, still unmelted in September the last time I visited, where good 
footwear, hiking poles, and balance come in handy. Immediately after reaching 
it comes a massive exhalation of breath, as you take in the gloriously 
expansive view that has opened up before you.

For the few hardy souls who are still not done, the trail descends through 
the splendid Ohanapecosh Park, at first gently and then more steeply, arriving 
at [IndianBar] 3 miles later and 2000' lower. Combining both of these sections, 
a through-hike from Fryingpan Creek to Box Canyon is 15.5 miles with 4600' of 
climbing and 5400' descent.
