Black Bear

[../CarbonGlacier/Bear.jpg]

Bear are among Rainier's most iconic animals, and a source of concern for some hikers. 
Should we wear bells to warn them of our approach, or carry bear spray in case of adverse 
interactions? Not necessary in my opinion, although feel free to carry spray if it makes 
you more comfortable. I do make a point of calling out or singing before rounding blind 
corners when I'm hiking alone in bear country.

Far more dangerous than bears, unfortunately, are humans. It breaks my heart that many 
female hikers find bear spray valuable in case of adverse interactions with creepy men.

All the bear on Rainer are black bears, which are far less aggressive than brown bear aka 
grizzlies. Even if you see a bear that is brown or cinnamon in color, don't worry: if 
you're on Rainier, that's a black bear.

Bear have extraordinary senses of smell, will eat just about anything, and are extremely 
food motivated, yet the ones on Rainier are generally mellow and uninterested in people 
because they are not habituated to human food. This is a gift given to you by the hikers 
of years past, who carefully hung their food and avoided any bear getting a food reward. 
You can pay it forward to the hikers of the future by being equally careful yourself.

In years past, such was not the case. Early in the 20th century, visitors used to line up 
to watch bears who would scavenge when the kitchens at Paradise dumped out scraps. We 
have learned much about how to coexist gracefully with wildlife since then!

The diet of a black bear is 90% vegetarian, consisting mainly of leafy plants, flowers, 
tree buds, roots, nuts, and huge quantities of berries. They also eat insects, carrion, 
fish, and will prey on fawns if an opportunity presents. Despite the popular association 
of bears with honey, the main reason they raid bee and wasp nests is for the insects and 
larvae.

Black bear are strong tree climbers as well as swimmers. They can run up to 35 miles per 
hour.

These photos are blurry because in all my time on Rainier I have encountered fewer bears 
than I would like, and only briefly at a distance. It's a treat to see them and I hope 
for more in the future.
