Elk

Elk travel in large herds and move considerable distances with the changing seasons. In 
summer and early fall you might encounter them near Grand Park, Palisades Lakes, or the 
Cowlitz Divide. In winter they'll be at lower elevations, perhaps Grove of the Patriarchs 
or outside Mount Rainier National Park around Greenwater and Packwood.

An adult elk eats 20 pounds of vegetation every day.

During the fall rut, bull elk make loud bugling calls to attract cows and scare off other 
males. They sound a bit like a child in the early stages of learning to play the French 
horn.

Beginner hikers may wonder how to distinguish elk vs. <a href="Deer.html">deer</a>. Key 
differences: elk are bigger, likely be seen in larger groups, have darker colored legs 
and necks where deer are a single color all over, and have white rump patches with short 
stubby tails.

Roosevelt (aka Olympic) elk were once native to Rainier, but their population declined 
throughout the Cascades as settlement and hunting increased. Even after the creation of 
Mount Rainier National Park, elk were vulnerable to hunters when they left the park to 
winter at lower elevation. By the start of the 20th century, they had become rare.

Between 1912 and 1932, elk were brought from Yellowstone National Park and released in 
the Cascades with the goal of restoring a population for the enjoyment of tourists.

Cue a century of concern as conservationists pointed out that the imported animals were 
Rocky Mountain elk, a different subspecies from the native Roosevelt elk. Perhaps they 
should be removed again to preserve the original ecosystem? After a 1962 survey found 
many elk, worries grew to include: was the population exploding? Were invasive elk 
behaving in a different way from native elk and damaging fragile meadows through 
overgrazing? Some believed that elk had <i>never</i> been native to Rainier. Should their 
population now be controlled?

Like it or not, the Roosevelt and Rocky Mountain elk crossbred many years ago. The herds 
living on Rainier today are a blend of both subspecies, and they've been here long enough 
that at this point I think they have a solid claim to belong on the mountain.
