Carbon Glacier
moderate (overnighter) or loooong (day hike)
17.8 2010 3450
Carbon River
Ipsut Creek, Carbon River
2019

[LifeExpectancy.jpg] A landscape in constant flux: these trees have limited life expectancy after being outflanked by the river
[Treeterfall.jpg] Should I call this a treeterfall, or perhaps a tweir?
[Bridge.jpg] Crossing the Carbon River on a log bridge that often washes away or is left high and dry after the river changes course, requiring frequent replacement by the trail repair crew
[Tease.jpg] Tease of a view from near the lower river crossing
[Rainforest.jpg] Glorious ferny rainforest
[SuspensionBridge.jpg] A mile past the lower bridge, there's no need to cross this suspension bridge unless you're heading to Spray Park, but it is fun to do so
[Bear.jpg] First time I ever met a bear close up along the trail!
[Trail.jpg] Final stretch of trail up to the Carbon Glacier viewpoint
[CarbonGlacier.jpg] Snout of the Carbon Glacier
[CarbonGlacier2.jpg] Same view, different season

<span class="trailinfo">This area is currently inaccessible because Fairfax Bridge (where 
SR165 crosses the Carbon River) was permanently closed in April 2025. WSDOT is evaluating 
next steps, but has no funding or ETA for a replacement. There is no other public access 
to the area :-(</span>

Hike or bike through magnificent old growth rainforest along the relatively 
flat [CarbonRiver] trail, then hike more steeply uphill to a viewpoint of 
the Carbon Glacier. This is the longest, thickest, and lowest elevation of 
all glaciers in the contiguous United States.

Stronger hikers could do this in a day, but I snagged a walkup permit for 
Ipsut Creek Camp, giving me a 12.8 mile first day and 5 mile second.

The trail joins up with the [Wonderland] shortly past Ipsut Falls. The fork 
where you head left toward Carbon River Camp rather than right to Ipsut Pass 
is a very special spot: this is the lowest elevation of the entire 
Wonderland. From here the trail follows the west side of the valley for a 
couple of miles, then crosses the Carbon River on a log bridge, joining up 
with the [NorthernLoop] and running up the east of the valley for another 
mile. Once upon a time the Wonderland used to continue up the west side 
here, but that has become yet another casualty of the destructive power of 
the Carbon River.

I could give more details such as a spot where you have to rock hop over a 
couple of smaller channels of the river to get around a tangle of fallen 
trees, or the rocky scramble down to the valley floor from where the old 
Wonderland route washed out, or following cairns to reach the log bridge, 
but these things will probably all be different by the time you visit here. 
The Carbon River loves to rearrange her furniture, and does so on a regular 
basis. Check recent trip reports, bring your route-finding common sense, and 
be prepared for adventure!

Shortly before reaching the glacier, you'll come to a suspension bridge 
crossing back over to the west side of the Carbon River. I guess the Park 
Service got fed up of endlessly replacing log bridges at this location? 
There's no need to cross, but it is fun (although given my fear of heights a 
bit scary) to do so. Carbon River Camp is near the far side of this bridge.

There is no specific end to this hike. Enjoy the glacier views, turn around 
when you are done, keep hiking on up to Dick Creek Camp, or stay on the 
Wonderland another 13 miles all the way to Sunrise, it's up to you.
