Indian Henry's from Longmire
strenuous
12 3420 5370
Longmire
Pyramid Creek, Devil's Dream
older

[KautzCreek.jpg] Looking up the valley of Kautz Creek
[Erosion.jpg] Erosion along Kautz Creek
[PyramidCreek.jpg] Thank you Park Service for this most excellent bridge over Pyramid Creek
[NearKiyaLake.jpg] Water is everywhere near Kiya Lake
[KiyaLake.jpg] Iron Mountain behind Kiya Lake
[NearTheCabin.jpg] Pond near Indian Henry's
[PatrolCabin.jpg] The Little Patrol Cabin That Could, at Indian Henry's Hunting Grounds
[Tahoma.jpg] The Tahoma Glacier below Liberty Cap (left), and South Tahoma Glacier below Point Success (right), with the Tahoma Cleaver separating them

For me at least, Indian Henry's Hunting Grounds is a place of romance and 
mystery.

It's on the remote west side of Mount Rainier, which is largely accessible only 
to backpackers. This is one of the few reasonable day hike destinations between 
Longmire and Mowich Lake.

It's also the first segment of the [Wonderland] to be experienced by many 
backpackers, as clockwise-starting-at-Longmire is the most popular Wonderland 
itinerary. I find it impossible to hike this trail without imagining the 
countless Wonderland adventures that have started here. At the first serious 
uphill I think of all the backpackers who perhaps found themselves here 
wondering, did I really need to bring that extra foldable camp chair? :-)

And then there's the history. The destination of this hike is named after a 
Taidnapam/Yakama farmer and guide named So-to-lick who spanned two worlds, 
combining traditional hunting and fishing customs with the ways of the settlers 
who called him Indian Henry. His real name was alternatively spelled 
Soo-Too-Lick, Sotolick, or Satulick. He was born near Yakima in 1825 and moved 
to the Mashel Prairie outside Eatonville in 1864, where he prospered as a 
farmer and provided travelers with lodging and supplies. He guided early 
climbing parties including those of John Muir, James Longmire, and Philemon van 
Trump. He went on frequent expeditions to the high meadows of the Hunting 
Grounds, and there were rumors that he had a secret gold mine in the area. No 
sign of it has ever been found though.

Kiya Lake used to be named after a racist label for Native women (Sq___  Lake) 
due to a story that So-to-lick's wives would rest near it while he hunted in 
the meadows above. But who in their right mind would choose to hang out there? 
It's pretty and all, but SO many mosquitos! The lake was renamed to Kiya, which 
means 'grandmother' in the Lushootseed language of the Puget Sound Salish, in 
2022 after the Department of the Interior declared Sq___ a derogatory term.

The hunting grounds lie below [MountArarat], which was named by Ben Longmire 
(grandson of pioneer James Longmire, and original builder of many Rainier trails). 
Ben found a petrified tree stump with what looked like rope marks around it in 
the middle of a field of debris, and romantically fancied that this might be 
where Noah's Ark had first tied up after the flood.

Anyways. The trail starts at Longmire: park in the lot to the right of the road 
shortly after the main Longmire complex. Cross the road, and head north along 
the forested Wonderland Trail signposted Pyramid Creek and Devils Dream (ah, 
the romance of these names). Climb up to Rampart Ridge, ignoring the Van Trump 
trail turnoff on the right and Rampart Ridge trail on the left. Descend to the 
Kautz Creek valley, which (at least each time I've been here) contains a small 
trickle of water in the middle of a giant swathe of destruction that testifies 
to how not-small it can become when in the right mood. Follow cairns to find 
your way across the valley floor, then pass Pyramid Creek Camp and use the log 
bridges to cross Pyramid Creek. Now comes a serious climb, switchbacking up 
through forest, crossing Hornpipe Creek, switchbacking up some more through 
different forest, and eventually arriving at Devils Dream Camp, which turns out 
to be just a few flat spaces to pitch tents in the middle of the forest.

Shortly past the camp, views start to open up at Kiya Lake, which is a lovely 
area of trees and water and frogs. A little more climbing and you arrive at 
Indian Henry's Hunting Grounds. This is an open meadow containing a historic 
patrol cabin, framed in front of a Rainier perspective that you just can't get 
anywhere else. The cabin was built in 1915, and all these years later the porch 
is still a great place to eat lunch when it's raining.

If you have any gumption left, continue 0.2 miles to a turnoff on the right, 
which is a 0.5 mile spur to the photogenic Mirror Lakes.

Indian Henry's Hunting Grounds can also be reached via 
[IndianHenrysFromKautzCreek].
