Laughingwater Creek
strenuous
11.9 3160 4820
Ohanapecosh
Three Lakes
2020

[Trail.jpg] Trees along the trail
[TreesInMist.jpg] Trees in the mist
[Glade.jpg] Forest glade, with wildflowers just starting to open
[BearGrass.jpg] Bear grass is by far the most like a Dr. Seuss character of all wildflowers
[OneOfThree.jpg] One of the Three Lakes

What a delightful name for a trail! I defy anyone to hear this mentioned and not 
immediately want to hike it.

Unfortunately the name is, while not quite a lie, definitely an exaggeration. There is 
indeed water, and it does laugh, but the creek is the opposite of a 19th century child as 
it is heard but not seen. This is not a river hike at all, but a quiet forest trail which 
climbs up the northern side of the valley and offers an unusually good chance of solitude.

Luckily, the forest is more than lovely enough to make up for lack of proximity to the 
promised laughing water. It is open and light, packed with delightful glens, dells, 
and glades. The trail climbs steeply for the first mile, then settles into a gentler 
gradient alternating with flat sections (yes, you heard that right. Flat trail sections 
on Mount Rainier. Whodathunkit!) The pace is relaxed enough that you won't realize how 
much altitude you are gaining until your quads start complaining.

The distance shown here is roundtrip to Three Lakes, which did much to restore my faith 
in the naming of things because these truly are lakes, and there are three of them. 
There's a campsite and ranger patrol cabin by the first two lakes, which are close 
together. The third lake is slightly further and outside of Mount Rainier National Park 
(look for the boundary marker nailed to a tree). If you continue past here, 1.5 
additional miles and a thousand feet elevation gain will take you to the Pacific Crest 
Trail (see: [EastsidePCTLoop]).

Unusually for a Rainier trail, horses are allowed here. So there's no need to worry, that 
massive pile of poop on the trail is not from the largest ever bear :-)
