Brown Peak
moderate but unofficial
9.5 2590 6500
Sunrise
Dick's Lake, Upper Palisades
2023

[Turnoff.jpg] Turning off the Palisades Lake trail toward Brown Peak
[LowerPalisadesLake.jpg] Looking down over Lower Palisades Lake
[RidgeHike.jpg] What a glorious ridge hike this is
[Ridge2.jpg] Looking backward down the ridge, with the Cowlitz Chimneys in the distance
[Offtrail.jpg] Where did my path go? Must tread carefully to minimize damage to fragile plants...
[SouthSlideMountain.jpg] Where I turned around: looking north at South Slide Mountain
[Palisades.jpg] View over the Palisades toward Tahoma

<span class="trailinfo">This is an off-trail route. Only come here if your navigation is 
up to the task of finding your way where there are no trails to follow, and practice 
Leave No Trace to avoid damaging fragile terrain.</span>

Follow the [PalisadesLakes] trail for 3.4 miles, then turn east just before arriving at 
Upper Palisades Lake. Climb steeply up what starts as a clearly defined although 
unofficial social trail, figure out how to proceed as one path fragments into many, turn 
north upon reaching the summit of Brown Peak, and enjoy a mile of ridge hike splendor. 
This offers views of Bear Park to your right, Lower Palisades Lake and the Lost Creek 
drainage to your left, over the Palisades to Tahoma on your rear left flank, and the 
Cowlitz Chimneys behind you. The ridge descends slightly, then climbs to a second unnamed 
summit. It is narrow in places, but never scary even to me who is scared of such things. 
The 'path' becomes ever more fragmentary and at times even hypothetical as you approach 
the second summit.

It is possible to continue past here, to South Slide Mountain and beyond that to Slide 
Mountain, but the route becomes scramblier and more exposed so I decided this was enough 
for me.

Elk regularly inhabit the saddle in between Brown Peak and the second unnamed peak. I saw 
none the day I visited, but there was an incredible amount of their poop, plus bare 
patches of ground where they sleep. I also saw cougar poop, because where there are elk 
there will be kittycats.

If you already happen to be at Upper Palisades Lake, the unofficial portion of this 
hike is 2.6 miles roundtrip with 610' elevation gain.
