Cowlitz Gap
moderate but off-trail
6.3 1920 7120
Paradise
none
2022

[StevensCreek.jpg] The spot where I chose to ford Stevens Creek
[UpTheMoonscape.jpg] Heading up the moonscape toward Cowlitz Gap
[DownTheMoonscape.jpg] Looking back over this bizarre landscape, with the Tatoosh Range in the distance and Stevens Creek running down the valley
[Meltwater.jpg] A small meltwater pond
[ParadiseGlacier.jpg] The upper remnant of the Paradise Glacier, viewed from near Cowlitz Gap
[CowlitzAndIngrahamGlaciers.jpg] The Cowlitz (left) and Ingraham (right) glaciers, viewed from Cowlitz Gap
[CowlitzRocks.jpg] Looking up at the Cowlitz Rocks, from Cowlitz Gap

This is an off-trail route. Only come here if your navigation is up to the task of 
finding your way where there are no trails to follow, and practice Leave No Trace to 
avoid damaging fragile terrain.

If you enjoy the barren moonscape of the [ParadiseGlacier] trail, where a glacier has 
recently retreated and the landscape has not yet adapted to that change, this hike is for 
you. Follow the Paradise Glacier trail to the 'End of Maintained Trail' sign, turn right, 
ford Stevens Creek, then head up the valley keeping to the right of Stevens Creek until 
you reach the pass, which offers stunning views of no less than three glaciers from a 
single lunch spot (Paradise Glacier, Cowlitz Glacier, Ingraham Glacier).

From Cowlitz Gap, climbers and scramblers may wish to continue to the top of Cowlitz 
Rocks, but that was too steep to have any appeal for me :-)

If you visit in the season of things being melted like I did, the terrain consists of 
rock and dust, not always well bonded together, and scoured by deep gullies. It's cool 
but not particularly easy to walk over as you'll frequently have to detour side-to-side 
to avoid excessively deep gullies.

Many visit here in winter, as reasonable inclines make it a safe snowshoe choice for days 
with low or medium avalanche risk. In many ways I expect winter travel here would be 
easier than during the summer, as snow will fill the gullies and solidify the loose 
rocks, but beware snow bridges during the spring melt.

Navigational notes: it seems easier to ford Stevens Creek lower down than higher up. As 
always with river crossings, if you aren't comfortable, turn back! At the steepest part 
of the trail, where the creek turns into waterfalls, there's a good way up keeping to the 
right, some distance away from the creek.

I saw a ton of mountain goat sign: footprints and scat everywhere.

The distance shown above is starting at the 4th Crossing trail. This hike could be 
extended by starting at Paradise via [PanoramaPoint], or Reflection Lakes via 
the [LakesLoop].
