Palisades Lakes
moderate
8.1 2400 6140
Dick's Lake, Upper Palisades
2020

[EarlyLight.jpg] Early morning light
[Trail.jpg] Stream crossing along the trail
[HiddenLake.jpg] Hidden Lake
[Lupin.jpg] Glorious fields of lupin
[Pond.jpg] Unnamed pond along the trail
[UpperPalisadesLake.jpg] Upper Palisades Lake

Five lakes, subalpine forest alternating with meadows, and an abundance of 
wildflowers: what's not to like about this hike?

Starting at Sunrise Point, do not be put off by the multitude of parked cars 
and teenagers playing loud music while taking selfies in front of The 
Mountain. Most of these people are just here for the viewpoint, so crowds 
dwindle once you hit the trail.

Unusually, the path starts out downhill, as your car is its highest point. 
After losing some altitude, a spur on the left takes you to Sunrise Lake. 
Once back on the main trail you will pass Clover Lake, then climb a bit, 
descend the steepest part of the trail, and reach another spur on the left 
which climbs to the attractive Hidden Lake (which would be better hidden if 
the trail leading to it was not so clearly signposted :-)

The stats shown above include the spurs to Sunrise Lake and Hidden Lake. If 
you skip these, the hike is 6.9 miles with 1980' elevation gain.

Shortly past the Hidden Lake turnoff you'll arrive at Dick's Lake, which is 
quiet, green, and home to a campsite.

The final section of trail in between Dick's Lake and Upper Palisades Lake 
is a treat for the soul. Relatively flat meadows overflowing with so much 
lupin that it smelled like I'd walked into a Lush store. I couldn't stop 
grinning.

Upper Palisades Lake is home to a second campsite, and the end of the 
maintained trail. If you want to go further, an unofficial but clearly 
visible path continues from here to Lower Palisades Lake, descending 500' 
along the way.

The only downside to this trail is its lack of Rainier views. Should you 
find yourself back at your car with gumption left over, this can be 
addressed by also hiking the [DegePeakFromSunrisePoint] trail, which starts 
from the same place.
