Tahoma Creek
moderate (but sketch af)
6.5 1650 4200
Westside Road
none
never

[Trailhead.jpg] Unmarked trailhead where the road turns to the left away from Tahoma Creek
[HereBeDragons.jpg] It's almost like the Park Service doesn't want people to hike here...

Unlike every other trail listed on this website, I have not hiked Tahoma Creek, and never 
will. I have added it to this site in order to explain why not.

The Park Service makes their opinion on the Tahoma Creek trail extremely clear:

<i>"CLOSED DUE TO DEBRIS FLOW AND HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS. THE TAHOMA CREEK HAS TAKEN OVER 
THE TRAIL. NOTE: This is an unmaintained trail in an area with high risk of geohazards 
such as flooding and debris flows. These events have occurred frequently in the past and 
are expected to occur again. There are only remnants of this trail remaining. Navigation 
is difficult and the route is hazardous. It is NOT recommended to hike Tahoma Creek 
Trail."</i>

And yet, enough people still hike this route that it gets a couple of WTA trip reports 
per year. It's easy to see why: the trail has a long history (it was part of the original 
1915 route of the Wonderland!) and it provides day hikeable access to the spectacular 
Tahoma Creek Suspension Bridge, which is otherwise a long way from anywhere.

As of 2021, trip reports indicated route-finding challenges, stream crossings with no 
bridges, and a couple of slide areas. Plus of course the ever-present risk of 
unpredictable lahars. I thought this over, and decided I was willing to take on the risk 
of exploring the trail.

It was not to be. About a quarter mile in, I suddenly got a really strong feeling that I 
wasn't supposed to be there. I listen to that kind of hunch, so I hightailed it out of 
the geohazard zone and will not be attempting this trail again. If the mountain does not 
wish me to hike her namesake creek, so be it.

(this story would be better if a lahar had come rushing down the creek seconds after I 
was out of its way, but of course one didn't :-)
