Satulick Mountain
strenuous and off-trail
12.1 3500 5570
Longmire
Pyramid Creek, Devil's Dream
2026

[Distant.jpg] Satulick Mountain is visible in the distance while crossing Kautz Creek
[Brush.jpg] Most of the off-trail portion is a mix of bushes and intermittent trees
[Steep.jpg] Did I mention it was steep?
[Huckleberries.jpg] This density of brush doesn't make for the best of footing
[Summit.jpg] The summit consists of a flat open area, filled with wildflowers, surrounded by trees
[View.jpg] Ah yes, this right here is why I do such things

<span class="trailinfo">This is an off-trail route. Only come here if your navigation is 
up to the task of finding your way where there are no trails to follow, and practice 
Leave No Trace to avoid damaging fragile terrain.</span>

Hike 5.5 miles up the [IndianHenrysFromLongmire] trail to Devil's Dream camp, then turn 
left and bushwhack up 600' in half a mile to the top of a peak which features a flat 
meadow area surrounded by trees that partially block what would otherwise be stupendous 
views in all directions.

If this sounds underwhelming, it kinda was. It's one for the completists, or for those 
who value getting to be where most others aren't, or for anyone who wants to make a blood 
offering to the hordes of ravenous insects I found up there.

You'll want to head off-trail somewhere around the upper end of Devil's Dream. I went 
past the bear pole at the group campsite. The ascent is navigationally straightforward: 
just keep going up until there's no more up to go. You'll want better navigation options 
coming down, though, as only one direction leads back to Devil's Dream while other sides 
of the mountain are cliffy. I found occasional fragments of bootpath, but nothing I was 
able to follow for long.

Did I mention it was steep? Plush brushy. Huckleberry stems make for poor footing. Not 
ashamed to admit I crawled at one point.

Satulick was a Taidnapam/Yakama farmer and guide, also known as Indian Henry. He sounds 
like quite a character - there were even rumors that he had a secret gold mine somewhere 
in this area. But man, what do I gotta do to get a mountain named after me? :-)
