Glacier Basin / Burroughs Loop
moderate
todo todo todo
older

[Uphill.jpg] TODO

Burroughs Mountain and Glacier Basin are old favorites of mine, but this was the first time I combined them into a loop.  Highly recommended!  The result is a significant hike (I covered ~13 miles) with tremendous variety of scenery.  Dense old growth forest, sparser alpine forest, meadows, high tundra, rivers, waterfalls, lakes, and expansive views of glaciers and mountain - this loop really has it all (being pedantic: except for snow/ice).

I parked at the White River campground and started up the Glacier Basin trail, enjoying the early morning quiet.  Continued 0.7 miles past the sign marking the turnoff on the right for Burroughs, to enjoy Glacier Basin itself. This added a little distance but was well worth it for a peaceful second breakfast even though morning cloud limited views here.  Backtracking and heading up the side trail (which is signposted Sunrise rather than Burroughs) I climbed steeply through varying types of forest, enjoying the transition to alpine meadows and then sparse tundra. This path joins the main Burroughs route in the dip between the second and third summits. Resisting the temptation to push myself and include the third peak, I turned right and climbed up to Second Burroughs, just in time for the cloud to burn off and views open in all directions. From here the route back took me past First Burroughs, Frozen Lake, assorted beautiful meadows, and then (steeply) down a section of the Wonderland Trail as forest gradually reasserted itself - and back to my car with legs aching and soul exhilarated.

Things I loved about this loop:

Great variety of terrain
Complete solitude on the connecting sections (unlike Burroughs itself which is always crowded)
Many options to adjust length depending on mood (go all the way to Glacier Basin campsite or not, perhaps head further up that basin, and optionally take in Third Burroughs)
An important choice is which direction to hike it.  I went clockwise, which gave a nice progression of gradient (gentle up, steep up, gentle down, steep down), and left time for the cloud to burn off before the views opened up during the high part of the hike. But this also meant I was facing away from the mountain during the viewtastic portion, and I hit the most crowded part of the Burroughs trail at the busiest time of midday.  An alternative would be to park at Sunrise and hike it counterclockwise, but ending a long hike with the climb back up from White River to Sunrise would be brutal.  Next time I'm thinking about parking at White River but going counterclockwise, and trying to time my start so I have enough light to start in thick forest but still make it up to views while there's dawn light on the mountain and not yet too many people around.

This is definitely a late season route.  Snow usually lingers on Burroughs well into the summer, and I wouldn't have enjoyed the trail up from Glacier Basin to Burroughs if it was at all icy.
