Mount Ararat
strenuous and off-trail
11.1 3830 5990
Longmire
none
2024

[Approaching.jpg] On the Kautz Creek trail, approaching Mount Ararat from the south
[Offtrail.jpg] A straightforward and nontechnical off-trail climb
[Summit.jpg] The summit of Ararat is wide and relatively flat
[Copper.jpg] Copper Mountain
[Tahoma.jpg] Her Majesty, viewed from Ararat

<span class="trailinfo">This is an off-trail route. Only come here if your navigation is 
up to the task of finding your way where there are no trails to follow, and practice 
Leave No Trace to avoid damaging fragile terrain.</span>

Hang on, what's a biblically significant Turkish mountain doing in a Rainier hiking guide?

Blame Ben Longmire. The grandson of pioneer James Longmire, Ben worked as a park ranger 
and trail builder. He is responsible for several romantic placenames including Devils 
Dream, Fishers Hornpipe Creek, and Martha Falls (which is named after his mother).

Frank Brockman wrote in 1932:

<i>Preston Macy, Assistant Chief Ranger, found considerable petrified wood fragments on 
the slope of Mount Ararat in Indian Henry's Hunting Ground recently. One portion of 
particular interest was a tree stump. The name of this mountain is the result of Ben 
Longmire's finding such a stump in that section. Mr. Longmire surmised humorously that 
"That probably was the tree to which Noah tied the Ark" - hence the name.</i>

Most of the distance and elevation gain of this strenuous hike is incurred along the 
[IndianHenrysFromKautzCreek] trail. After turning off-trail, the scramble to the top of 
Mount Ararat is only half a mile with 400' elevation gain. There's no single correct 
route here - just look at your map and pick an approach where the contours indicate steep 
rather than cliffs. The easiest option is to continue on the Kautz Creek trail 
past the east flank of Ararat, then climb it from the east, but in winter (as this hike 
can work as a snowshoe on days with low avalanche risk) it's probably better to ascend 
directly from the south.

The summit of Ararat is a wide and flat meadow offering stunning views of the west face 
of Tahoma. It's a great place to enjoy solitude while soaking in that splendor. The Kautz 
Creek trail itself is fairly quiet, and the off-trail portion of Ararat even more so.

Mosquitos were awful at the top, and the view was socked in cloud when I arrived there. I 
spent an hour encased in my rain gear to protect myself from the biters, hoping things 
would open up, and it paid off.
