Backbone Ridge
strenuous and unmaintained
10.8 2990 3200
Ohanapecosh
Backbone Lake (unofficial, outside MRNP)
2021

[Trailhead.jpg] Trailhead, by the southernmost tip of Stevens Canyon Road
[Sign.jpg] Unmaintained-trail sign is also an unmaintained trail-sign
[Trail.jpg] Lovely forested trail
[BackboneLake.jpg] Backbone Lake
[Trail2.jpg] More lovely trail
[OpenSection.jpg] A brief open section of trail while descending Backbone Ridge
[OldRoad.jpg] Old trailhead on what was once Forest Road 1270, now rapidly becoming a lovely trail in its own right
[CowlitzRiver.jpg] The Cowlitz River, where there was once a bridge

If the Skyline Trail is a digital remaster of a classic album and the Wonderland a 
limited edition vinyl box set, the Backbone Ridge trail is a 3rd generation cassette 
bootleg of a Grateful Dead show from 1973. It's unofficial, hard to find, shared by word 
of mouth between connoisseurs, and lacks mainstream appeal, yet there's a magic here that 
makes it worth preserving.

This trail has a longer history than most at Rainier, as it was used by the Taidnapam 
people to access the mountain from their summer camps along the Cowlitz River. Backbone 
Ridge refers to the lower part of what higher up becomes the Cowlitz Divide, and the 
route once continued all the way to the high meadow now known as Indian Bar.

The upper part of the trail fell out of use during the second half of the 20th century. 
Only the section from Cowlitz River up to Stevens Canyon Road is shown on modern maps. 
Then in 2006, epic flooding destroyed the bridge over the Cowlitz River, leaving the 
trailhead inaccessible. Maintenance ceased. As of May 2021, Washington Trails Association 
had flagged its entry for Backbone Ridge with a red banner: <i>"A washout on this trail 
has rendered this trail inaccessible"</i>. Their most recent trip report was from someone 
who failed to reach the trail in 2018 due to the missing bridge, and the last report of a 
successful hike was dated 2007.

But the trail has two ends! Perhaps I could hike it the other way, heading down from 
Stevens Canyon Road rather than up from the Cowlitz River? I had no idea what to expect 
when I set out to visit Backbone Ridge, and was fully anticipating having to turn around 
due to no path remaining at all.

I am pleased to report that the trail not only still exists as of 2021, but is in 
excellent condition, clearly being hiked on a somewhat regular basis. I found a few 
sections of overgrown brush (long pants recommended) but never so much that the route was 
hard to follow. No difficult blowdowns, plus there was recent flagging (orange ribbon 
tied to trees along the route). Around the far side of Backbone Lake, there's even a well 
maintained campsite.

In fact the trail was in such good shape that it got me wondering, what about the earlier 
abandoned upper/north section of Backbone Ridge? I was too tired to explore this, but 
noticed the start of a path heading that way. Something to investigate another day...

Navigational notes: the trail starts at the southernmost point along Stevens Canyon Road, 
where the National Park protrudes to the south. Driving from the east, there's a large 
parking space on the right near the apex of the bend. If you arrive at the viewpoint on 
the left and see Rainier, you've driven too far. Unmarked trailhead is across the road 
from the west of the parking space. Only the first few hundred feet of trail are inside 
the National Park, but that's quite enough to justify its inclusion on this website (even 
though the entire route lies off the edge of the map I designed the site around :-( 
Caltopo shows the Backbone Ridge trail on both its main MapBuilder layer and the historic 
1915-1945 map layer, in slightly different places. These are both wrong, as the actual 
trail runs in between the two.

This is a forested ridge hike with no views, although there are several more open 
sections where you can enjoy the warmth of sun on your skin. Backbone Lake is slightly 
off the main trail and well worth looping around. Options for a shorter hike would be to 
turn around at the lake (5.7 miles, 2070' gain) or at what used to be the lower trailhead 
on Forest Road 1270 (6.6 miles, 2370' gain), but I'm a sucker for abandoned roads in the 
process of being reclaimed by trees, of which this was a lovely example, so I continued 
all the way down to the Cowlitz River. That's a strange place. You can see earthworks 
that once supported the bridge, hear the traffic of nearby US 12, and wave at the car 
campers on the other side of the river, but there is no way to reach them. I was 
topologically remote yet physically so close to civilization.

While hiking back up to my car, I was thinking about the Taidnapam people who walked this 
route so many times before me. Their trail has been superseded by roads that allow easier 
access to the high places, and is fading from the memory of hikers as it ages off the 
maps, yet it still exists. This is a strong trail, part of the history of this mountain, 
and it welcomes those who seek it out. The symbolism is unsubtle.
