Spray Park Loop
strenuous (overnighter) or insane (day hike)
16 4910 6380
2019

[OverTheTop.jpg] Near the top, where Spray Park becomes Seattle Park
[Cairns.jpg] Cairns mark the way through this barren landscape
[SeattlePark.jpg] About to drop down from Seattle Park toward the Carbon River valley
[SuspensionBridge.jpg] Suspension bridge over the Carbon River
[CarbonRiver.jpg] Crossing the Carbon River for the second time

Wonderland hikers have a choice when they reach the northwest corner of the 
mountain: stay on the Wonderland Trail proper over Ipsut Pass, or take the 
scenic detour over Spray Park? This loop combines both options. If you've 
completed the Wonderland but are yet to hike the Spray Park Loop, you owe it 
to yourself to do this and check out whichever section of trail you missed 
before!

I first heard about this loop when a friend and I hiked to [SprayPark] in 
2017, as a gear shakedown in preparation for my first [CampMuir] hike. Near 
our turnaround we met a grizzled mountain man coming down from a glacier 
where he'd climbed up to catch the dawn. He told us that if we kept going we 
could hike a big loop, all the way around Mother Mountain, returning to 
Mowich Lake on the far side of the dramatic crags we could see to our left.

I didn't know Rainier nearly as well then as I do now, so was fascinated to 
learn this. 16 miles, though. Further than we'd attempted before, but my 
friend was training for a marathon and I was in the best hiking shape of my 
life. Perhaps this should be our next challenge after I got back from Muir?

When we got home, I looked up the details and saw the elevation gain. Nope, 
I'm out. There are some who could day hike this, but not me.

A couple of years later I completed the Spray Park Loop as an overnight 
backpacking trip. I got a walkup permit for Ipsut Creek Camp, and went 
counterclockwise from Mowich Lake. This resulted in long first and short 
second days, but Carbon River Camp, which would have balanced my trip more 
evenly, was full by the time my turn came at the ranger station.

Like a mini Wonderland, this route packs an incredible variety of scenery 
(and also altitude) into a relatively short distance. There are several 
distinct types of forest including magnificent temperate rainforest, alpine 
wildflower meadows, high altitude rockeries, snowfields, many waterfalls, 
babbling brooks, the devastation of a glacier-fed river valley, craggy 
cliffs, and a fun suspension bridge.

Going counterclockwise: hike to [SprayPark] but keep on keeping on where 
you'd normally turn around, over snowfields (earlier in the season) or a 
desolate rockscape (later in the year). Beware getting lost in bad weather 
up here, and be sure to turn left at the high point rather than following 
the boot track further up toward Echo Rock (an easy mistake).

When the trail eventually turns downhill, you're in Seattle Park. Enjoy the 
descent through these lovely meadows, which have quite a different flavor 
from Spray Park. Then descend more steeply as you enter forest, past 
Cataract Valley Camp, and down again to Carbon River Camp. Cross the Carbon 
River on the suspension bridge, hike through lush rainforest down the east 
side of its valley, cross over the river again to continue along the west 
side, and turn left onto the trail signposted Ipsut Pass. Or continue 
another 0.3 miles if you are staying at Ipsut Creek Camp for the night.

The final section climbs for 3.5 miles through a temperate rainforest 
populated by giant trees and numerous streams and waterfalls. The trail 
becomes steeper as it emerges from forest for a final brutal climb, 
overlooked by some impressive cliffs, up to Ipsut Pass.

Phew, made it to the top! Only to be underwhelmed as you realize that the 
flat area through the notch in the ridge you climbed so far to reach doubles 
as the trail to [TolmiePeak]. I was applauded by a very fresh looking 
passing family as I staggered up the final switchback and collapsed gasping 
for air in front of them :-)

From here it's an easy mile back to Mowich Lake.
