Mather Memorial (snowshoe)
moderate
10.8 1050 3790
Cayuse Pass
none
2023

[Entrance.jpg] Driving under the National Park entrance arches always makes me happy, but walking under them is even more fun!
[WhiteCrystal.jpg] White River in front of Crystal Peak
[Stalactites.jpg] Icicle stalactites by the side of the road
[View.jpg] View from my turnaround spot: Rainier of course, Goat Island Mountain in front of it, Sunrise Ridge to the right, and the top of Tamanos Mountain peeking over The Barrier to the left

I'd driven up the Mather Memorial Parkway (aka WA 410) a gazillion times on my way to 
higher altitude summertime delights before I finally got around to visiting here during 
the off-season. During the months when the road is closed to cars at the National Park 
boundary, you can snowshoe, ski, or snowmobile up it (winter) or walk/cycle (spring).

Park in the Silver Springs sno-park (turn left onto Crystal Mountain Boulevard, then 
immediately right: it's not in quite the same place as the Silver Springs campground!) 
and make sure you have a sno-park permit if coming here in winter.

It's a road rather than a trail, but by slowing down to walk it you will notice views 
over the White River (at first by your side, then sprawled below you after the road gains 
some altitude), of Crystal Peak ahead, Sunrise Ridge to your right, and occasional 
tantalizing could-that-be-the-summit through the trees. I also enjoyed many streams and 
small waterfalls, some of them frozen, much elk poop, and one pile of cougar scat.

Sharing the road is important here. During winter, snowshoers should keep to the sides 
and avoid walking over ski tracks, because snowshoe indentations are at best a nuisance 
and at worst dangerous if a skier were to hit them at speed. In spring, other hikers are 
unlikely but you'll probably be overtaken by vehicles carrying park staff who are busy 
preparing for the season to come.

When you reach the Crystal Lakes trailhead after 4.5 miles, you're nearly there. Another 
half mile takes you to where the Sunrise Road turns off to the right. Skiers and 
intrepid winter campers may wish to follow this to further adventure, but for most 
snowshoers the distance has probably already been sufficient. Following 410 another 0.4 
miles leads to an opening where on a clear day you will enjoy a stunning view up the 
White River valley to the summit, but this comes with a major caution:

Avalanches. Look at the last photo below. Notice there are big view-blocking trees to my 
left, and to my right, but only small shrubs growing immediately below me. Wonder why? 
Yup, this is an old avalanche chute. What slid once, could again. Be wary of this 
viewpoint if you lack avalanche knowledge or if the risk is high that day. And definitely 
don't go any further when there is snow on the slopes above, as higher sections of this 
road are extremely avalanche-prone.

Stephen Mather was the first director of the National Park Service, serving from 1917 to 1929.
